Tempus Core: Area-Power Efficient Temporal-Unary
Convolution Core for Low-Precision Edge DLAs
Prabhu Vellaisamy, Harideep Nair, Thomas Kang, Yichen Ni, Haoyang Fan, Bin Qi, Jeff Chen,
Shawn Blanton, and John Paul Shen
ECE Department, Carnegie Mellon University
{pvellais, hpnair, thomaska, yichenn, hfan2, binq, jhchen2, rblanton, jpshen}@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract—The increasing complexity of deep neural networks
(DNNs) poses significant challenges for edge inference deploy-
ment due to resource and power constraints of edge devices.
Recent works on unary-based matrix multiplication hardware
aimtoleveragedatasparsityandlow-precisionvaluestoenhance
hardware efficiency. However, the adoption and integration of
suchunaryhardwareintocommercialdeeplearningaccelerators
(DLA) remain limited due to processing element (PE) array
dataflow differences. This work presents Tempus Core, a convo-
lution core with highly scalable unary-based PE array compris-
ing of tub (temporal-unary-binary) multipliers that seamlessly
integrates with the NVDLA (NVIDIA’s open-source DLA for
accelerating CNNs) while maintaining dataflow compliance and
boosting hardware efficiency. Analysis across various datapath
granularities shows that for INT8 precision in 45nm CMOS,
Tempus Core’s PE cell unit (PCU) yields 59.3% and 15.3% Fig. 1. Quantization training accuracies achieved on different ImageNet
reductions in area and power consumption, respectively, over CNNsfordifferentinteger-basedprecisionswhencomparedtobaselineFP32
NVDLA’sCMACunit.Consideringa16x16PEarrayinTempus precision[8].Resultsshowminimalaccuracydecreasewithlowerprecisions.
Core, area and power improves by 75% and 62%, respectively,
while delivering 5x and 4x iso-area throughput improvements
for INT8 and INT4 precisions. Post-place and route analysis of Engine library [5]. In particular, FP8 training on various con-
Tempus Core’s PCU shows that the 16x4 PE array for INT4
volutional neural network (CNN) models has shown minimal
precision in 45nm CMOS requires only 0.017mm2 die area and
accuracy degradation while increasing throughput by 2x-4x
consumes only 6.2mW of total power. We demonstrate that
area-power efficient unary-based hardware can be seamlessly [3]. In addition to floating point formats, 8-bit integer (INT8)
integrated into conventional DLAs, paving the path for efficient training has been demonstrated to reduce the training time
unary hardware for edge AI inference. of CNNs on Pascal GPUs by 22% [6]. Although INT8 has
IndexTerms—NVDLA,GEMM,Temporal-Unary,Convolution
become the standard for DL inference, a shift toward INT4
MAC core, Low Precision, CNNs
precision has led to a 77% performance improvement over
INT8 [7]. The results of ImageNet trainings for quantized
I. INTRODUCTION
CNN models and their corresponding Top-5% accuracy are
SincetheintroductionofAlexNet[1]in2012,AIcomputa- presented in Fig. 1, showing minimal accuracy degradation
tionaldemandshavegrownrapidly[2],drivingtheadoptionof for INT4 quantized models compared to their baseline FP32
hardware accelerators like GPUs and TPUs for deep learning implementations. These quantization results offer tremendous
(DL) training and inference. However, DL’s computational promise particularly for edge inference deployment, where
needs have quickly outpaced the growth of available compute computational resources are limited.
power, leading to what is now termed the “AI compute gap”. Unary computing has recently emerged as a promising
This gap has renewed interest in innovative computational paradigm for low-precision AI, enabling highly area- and
techniques and architectures aimed at closing this compute power-efficient hardware by trading off latency for efficiency.
performance and energy efficiency gap. In particular, temporal encoding techniques have been shown
In recent years, quantization techniques have become an to significantly reduce computational overhead in matrix mul-
effective strategy for deploying AI models with reduced tiplicationunits,asdemonstratedbyrecentworks[9][10][11],
model complexity. While 32-bit floating point (FP32) was which exploit the inherent sparsity of DL models. However,
the standard for DL training, FP16 is now widely adopted, these existing implementations focus primarily on GEMM-
offering 4x-8x performance improvements [3]. Building on level designs and are not scaled to inherently support convo-
this trend, FP8 precision for both training and inference has lution dataflows. This work addresses that gap by extending
been proposed [4] and implemented by Nvidia in their H100 unary computing to convolution dataflows, while ensuring
GPUs, which support FP8 models through the Transformer compatibility with widely-used deep learning accelerators
4202
ceD
52
]RA.sc[
1v20091.2142:viXra

---PAGE BREAK---

TABLEI while maintaining functional integrity. This integration
WORDSPARSITYINDICATINGTHEPERCENTAGEOFZEROWEIGHTSIN enables programmers to retain the full functionality of
EIGHTQUANTIZEDINT8CNNS[13]
the DLA’s existing software stack.
3) Comprehensive Comparative Evaluation: We perform a
CNN Word(%)8bits
detailed comparison between the convolution datapath of
MobileNetV2 2.25 NVDLA’sconvolutioncore(CC)andTempusCoreacross
MobileNetV3 9.52 multiple levels of hierarchy, ranging from a single “PE
GoogleNet 1.91 cell” to PE array (multiple cells), and up to entire PCU
(PE Cell Unit). Rigorous evaluation is performed across
InceptionV3 1.99
lowintegerprecisionsandarraysizesusing45nmCMOS
ShuffleNetV3 1.43
technology to report post-synthesis metrics.
ResNet18 2.043 4) Place-and-Route Analysis: Unlike previous studies, we
ResNet50 2.45 conduct a post place-and-route analysis to obtain more
ResNeXt101 2.64 precisemeasurementsofareaandpowerbetweenaTem-
pusCore’sPEcellunit(PCU)andNVDLA’sCMACunit
for 16×4 array. Results show improvements of 53% in
(DLAs) like NVDLA [12]. Table I illustrates the inherent areaefficiencyand44%inpowerefficiency,respectively,
weightsparsityforINT8quantizedCNNsthatcanbeexploited in the case of Tempus Core’s PCU.
by unary computing. 5) Fine-Grained CNN Profiling: Additionally, weight dis-
Despite recent progress, there remains a substantial gap in tribution analysis for PE array tile size of 16x16 is
research. Only a few custom unary-based accelerators have conducted across convolution layers for INT8-quantized
been proposed, such as in [14] and [15]. These accelerators MobileNetV2 and ResNeXt101 models. This analysis
relyonstochasticcomputation,whichtradesoffcomputational providesinsightsintoapplication-specific,sparsity-driven
accuracyforhardwareefficiency.However,aslowerprecisions latency and thereby energy for Tempus Core.
become the standard, deterministic computation becomes es-
This paper is structured as follows. Section II provides
sential to minimize accuracy degradation. Furthermore, these
the background and overview of relevant topics. Section III
stochastic designs are not easily compatible with existing off-
describes the Tempus Core design and its integration into the
the-shelf DLAs, which are widely used in today’s installed
NVDLA design. Section IV discusses the evaluation method-
hardware base.
ology used in this study, with Section V reporting the results
This work presents Tempus Core, a highly hardware-
of the experiments along with their analysis. Finally, Section
efficient temporal-unary-binary convolution engine designed
VI summarizes conclusions and future work.
to integrate seamlessly into existing DLAs without sacrificing
compute accuracy. Tempus Core employs tub multipliers [11] II. BACKGROUNDANDRELATEDWORKS
withinitsprocessingelement(PE)arraytoexecuteconvolution A. General Matrix Multiplication
operations. Seamless integration into current DLAs is demon-
General matrix multiplication (GEMM) is a key DL op-
stratedthroughitsincorporationintotheNVDLAarchitecture
eration involving activation and weight matrix multiplication,
[12].Whilemaintainingthecomputationalaccuracyofbinary-
defined in the BLAS library [16], and can be expressed as:
based arithmetic designs, Tempus Core delivers improved
hardwareefficiencycomparedtotheNVDLAconvolutioncore
O :=αA×B+βC (1)
and remains fully compatible with NVDLA’s dataflow.
The main contributions of this work are as follows. where O is the output matrix of size M×P, and A, B,
1) Novel High Iso-Area Throughput Convolution Engine: and C, are input matrices of sizes M×N, N×P, M×P,
Tempus Core employs tub multipliers for unary-based respectively. α and β are scaling factors.
convolution, designed as a drop-in replacement for mod- The compute-intensive nature of fully connected and con-
ernDLAconvolutiondatapaths.Unlikeprevioustemporal volutional layers allows them to be efficiently mapped to
GEMM designs [9][10] that follow an outer-product matrix multiply units. A study indicates that up to 89% of
GEMM dataflow, Tempus Core serves as a convolution CPU runtime and 95% of GPU runtime are spent processing
engine supporting inner-product convolution dataflow, fully connected and convolutional layers in AlexNet [17],
improving efficiency without sacrificing compatibility. underscoring the critical role of GEMM in DL computations.
For Tempus Core comprising of 16×16 PE array, 5x
B. tubGEMM
and4xiso-areathroughputisrealizedforINT8andINT4
precisions, compared to standard binary-based NVDLA. tubGEMM [10][11] is a novel temporal-binary hybrid INT-
2) Integration with Industry-Grade DLAs: Unlike previous based GEMM architecture that inherently leverages the spar-
unary DLA datapaths, Tempus Core is designed for sity found in DL workloads, resulting in significant improve-
seamlessintegrationintoexistingbinary-basedDLAs,en- ments in latency and energy efficiency. This architecture
hancingkeyhardwareperformanceandefficiencymetrics processes activation data as binary inputs while encoding

---PAGE BREAK---

weight bits into a single temporal bitstream. The processing
element (PE) of tubGEMM consists of multiplexers, shifters,
and registers, contributing to a streamlined microarchitectural
design.Itemploysaunique2s-unaryencodingscheme,where
each unary bit or cycle is interpreted as a data value of 2,
effectivelyhalvingthelatency.Thisadvancementsignificantly
improves upon the performance of tuGEMM [9], which has
a worst-case latency of N ∗ (2w−1) 2 cycles. In contrast,
tubGEMM reduces the worst-case latency to N ∗ (2w−2)
cycles, where N represents the common dimension of input
matrices, and w denotes the bitwidth. Fig. 2 illustrates the
dataflow of an INT4 tub multiplier. A comparative design
analysis of existing unary-based GEMM architectures [11]
concludes tubGEMM to be the most optimal unary design.
Fig. 2. An example dataflow of an INT4 tub multiplier. The INT4 tub
multiplier take a 4-bit binary-encoded value and a single temporal-coded
bitstream as inputs. For each “1” bit in the bit-serial temporal-coded input,
thebinaryvalueisaccumulated,producingthedesiredoutputresult.
C. NVDLA Accelerator
NVDLA [12] is an open-source, industry-grade inference
engine developed by NVIDIA, integrated into Xavier systems
on chip (SoCs) for self-driving applications. It offers an end- Fig.3. OverviewofTempusCoreintegrationintoNVDLA.InNVDLA,the
to-endsoftware-hardwarestackthatprovidesaDLframework convolution buffer (CB)stores both activation and weightvalues, which are
fed into the Convolution Core (CC) consisting of the convolution sequence
along with a runtime environment and spans all the way to
controller (CSC), the Convolution MAC (CMAC) unit (containing the k×
RTL implementation. This study employs the nv small con- n MAC array, output registers, and handshaking logic) and the convolution
figuration, which is tailored for embedded and cost-sensitive accumulator (CACC). In this work, CC is replaced by Tempus Core, which
contains modified CSC and a PE cell unit (PCU) containing k tub-based
applications [12]. Unlike the nv large variant, the nv small
PEcellsreplacingCMAC.EachPEcellconsistsofntub-basedmultipliers.
designdoesnotincludeadedicatedcontrolprocessor;instead, Additional handshaking logic to facilitate multi-cycle convolution operation
it relies on the host processor for task scheduling, memory isalsopresent,aswellasoutputregisterstomaintainfunctionality.
management, and NVDLA control. Although other open-
source DLAs, such as Gemmini [18], exist, they are primarily
academic designs focused on GEMM acceleration. Moreover, operations to calculate partial sums in CC is the convolution
NVDLA was reported to be 3.77x faster than Gemmini when MAC (CMAC) unit. The CMAC unit consists of k processing
comparing equivalently sized configurations running ResNet- element (PE) cells (termed MAC Cells in [12]), each with n
50[19].Givenitsperformanceandprovenindustryreliability, multipliers, producing a partial result for each kernel. Data is
we select NVDLA as our experimental platform. broadcast from the CB via a convolution scheduler (CSC) to
Fig. 3 provides a high-level overview of NVDLA’s convo- the k PE cells, with partial results accumulated in the adder
lution pipeline. It comprises (i) the convolution buffer (CB), trees of the convolution accumulation (CACC) unit. Each cell
which stores input activations and filter weights, (ii) the con- supports clock gating to reduce dynamic power consumption
volution core (CC), which serves as the convolution datapath, during idle or underutilized conditions when the kernel count
and(iii)thepost-processingunit,whichincludestheactivation is insufficient for full utilization. In addition, CMAC features
engine,thepoolingengine,andothercomponentsessentialfor intermediate registers that facilitate retiming and pipelining.
accelerating CNNs. The primary datapath performing MAC To summarize the NVDLA microarchitecture hierarchy:

---PAGE BREAK---

1) The convolution engine in NVDLA is called convolution TABLEII
core (CC), the focus of this work. POST-SYNTHESISCELLAREA(TOP)ANDTOTALPOWER(BOTTOM)
RESULTSIN45NMCMOS:SINGLEPECELL(k=1)
2) TheCCcomprisesCSC,CMAC,andCACC.TheCMAC
unit contains k×n PE array, denoting k number of PE Configuration BinaryPECell tubPECell Improvement
(MAC) cells, each consisting n multipliers and registers Precision NumberofPEs(n) Area(µm2) Area(µm2) (%)
16 0.0022 0.0006 71.89
for caching partial sums. INT4 256 0.0371 0.0046 87.53
3) In addition to the n multipliers, each PE cell contains 1024 0.1462 0.0171 88.30
16 0.0056 0.0011 80.15
local registers and an adder tree to accumulate the inter- INT8 256 0.1063 0.0093 91.24
mediateresults,producingonepartialsumcorresponding 1024 0.4334 0.0355 91.81
to the PE cell.
Configuration BinaryPECell tubPECell Improvement
Precision NumberofPEs(n) Power(mW) Power(mW) (%)
III. TEMPUSCOREMICROARCHITECTURE 16 0.09 0.06 25.86
INT4 256 1.03 0.19 81.74
TheTempusCoremicroarchitecture(Fig.3)isimplemented 1024 3.98 0.51 87.25
as a temporal-unary-binary (tub) hybrid convolution engine, 16 0.20 0.088 54.72
INT8 256 3.00 0.32 89.35
designed as a drop-in replacement for the convolution core 1024 12.20 1.06 91.28
(CC) in NVDLA. Tempus Core adheres to the original
dataflow in NVDLA and can directly replace its convolution
core. Tempus Core consists of a modified CSC, PE cell unit is determined by the largest weight magnitude present in the
(PCU), and the CACC. The PCU is analogous to the CMAC array.WeprofilequantizedCNNstoreportapplication-specific
unit in NVDLA, containing k × n tub-based PE array for latency per array in Section V.
efficient MAC operation. In this setup, direct convolution
IV. EVALUATIONMETHODOLOGY
involves sharing the feature data array across k PE cells, with
each cell caching a different weight data array. Each PE cell This section details the evaluation setup, profiling method-
contributesapartialsum,producingk partialsumsperfeature ology, and key EDA tools used to measure latency and
and weight data array. These partial sums are subsequently energy values across designs. Comparative analysis between
accumulated in the CACC unit. While NVDLA’s CMAC unit NVDLA’s CC and Tempus Core is performed at three lev-
generates k partial sums per cycle, the Tempus Core’sPCU els of granularity: (i) single PE cell, (ii) k × n PE array,
generates k partial sums over multiple cycles, with the cycle and (iii) entire CMAC unit versus PCU in Tempus Core.
count equal to the largest weight magnitude in the k × n The analysis spans both INT8 and INT4 precisions, with
array. The modified CSC in Tempus Core feeds transposed varying k ×n configurations. The designs were synthesized
feature data since W × FT = accum(W ⊙ F). Note each usingNanGate45open-sourcecelllibraryinSynopsysDesign
PE cell also incorporates n 2s-unary blocks into the temporal Compiler, operating at a fixed 250 MHz clock frequency to
encoder,allowingoptimaltemporal-to-binarydataconversion. maintain consistent timing across evaluations. The binary PE
The registers corresponding to the PE cells cache the partial cells are elaborated with DesignWare-optimized multipliers
sums, which are only forwarded to the CACC once all partial and Wallace adder tree during synthesis. Furthermore, place-
sums have been generated across the cells. and-routeresultsareobtainedusingCadenceInnovuswiththe
Having detailed the key components of Tempus Core, we NanGate45 library to further extend the evaluation.
now outline its dataflow structure and its seamless integration Weight-value profiling is performed on two INT8-
into existing DLAs. quantized models, MobileNetV2 and ResNeXt101, to deter-
• The PCU comprises a k × n PE array, with dedicated mine application-specific latency and energy consumption.
Usinga16×16(k=16,n=16)maxpoolacrossweightspresent
registers for caching outputs and handshaking logic to
in the model’s convolution layers, the largest weight value
coordinate multi-cycle operations.
within each 16x16 tile is determined and its frequency of
• The input data and initial weight data cubes are divided
into 1×1×n element cubes. Each PE cell caches one occurrence as the largest value across is derived. This directly
correlates to the compute cycles since the largest value across
weight cube from the weight kernel, and the single input
data cube is shared between the k PE cells.
anarrayof16PEcellswith16multipliersbottlenecksthetub
• Each tub multiplier performs a multiplication between a model compute. Note the PCU takes a few extra cycles for
caching in and out the values, hence analysis pertains to the
singleweightandinputdataelementovermultiplecycles,
array.Additionally,sparsityisanalyzedinasimilarfashionto
and the adder tree in the cell accumulates the results into
estimate the average number of “silent” PEs per array, where
a partial sum to be fed next to the CACC unit.
tub multipliers remain inactive for zero-valued weights.
Further microarchitectural enhancements in Tempus Core
include the integration of additional handshaking protocols
V. RESULTS
with buffer blocks to accommodate multiple tub cycles per
A. Area-Power Efficiency
partial sum computation within each PE cell. This modifica-
tion ensures efficient synchronization and data integrity. The Post-synthesis results for a single PE cell, containing regis-
number of compute cycles for k ×n array in Tempus Core ters, multipliers, and an adder tree, are summarized in Table

---PAGE BREAK---

Fig.4. Post-synthesistotalpowerconsumption(left)andcellareautilization
(right)in45nmCMOSforthetwodifferent16×16designs,bothforINT4
andINT8precisions.
II. Single tub-based PE cells significantly outperform their
binary counterparts in both area and power efficiency. For
INT8, tub multipliers reduce area by 91.8% and power by
91.3% for n=1024 PEs. INT4 implementations achieve 88.3%
areaand87.2%powerreductions.PEcellwithtubmultipliers
Fig.5. Post-synthesisareautilizationandtotalpowerconsumptionin45nm
demonstrate superior scalability across n: area scales by 7.7x
CMOSacrossentireCMACandPCUunitsfordifferentarraywidths(16×n)
for INT4 and 8.5x for INT8, compared to 16.9x and 19x for withn=4,16,and32.CCreferstotheCMACunitinCC,andTCdenotes
binary PE cell. Power consumption scales by 2.9x for INT4 thePCUinsideTempusCore.Foraconstantcoreconfigurationof16PECells
(arrayheight),numberofmultipliersarevariedacrossINT8,INT4,andINT2
and 3.5x for INT8, versus 11.4x and 15x for binary PE cell.
precisions.PercentagedecreaseinareaandpowerconsumptionforINT8are
Tempus Core ’s scalability is maintained as we scale from denotedbythereddottedarrows.
a single PE cell to a 16 × 16 array. At INT8 precision,
the binary-based implementation requires 0.09 µm2 of area
and 3.8 mW of power, respectively. In comparison, Tempus
Core’s tub-based PE cells consume only 0.018 µm2 and 1.42
mW, achieving a 75% area reduction and 62% power savings.
Similarly, for INT4, the reductions are 80% in area and 41%
in power. These results are illustrated in Fig. 4.
Finally, moving further up in the hierarchy, post-synthesis
resultsoftheentireCMACunitandthePCUofTempusCore
are compared and illustrated in Fig. 5, for various widths (n)
in INT8, INT4, and INT2 precisions. The PCU improves area Fig.6. LayoutplotsforCMAC(left)andPCU(right)foranINT4-based16×
and power consumption by 59.3% and 15.3%, respectively. 4 array in 45nm CMOS. Note the significant reduction in logic complexity
forthelatterforthesamefloorplansize,indicatinglessareautilization.
Key Takeaway: PCU (and in turn, Tempus Core) demon-
strates significantly superior area-power efficiency compared
TABLEIII
tothebaselinebinary-basedCMACunitacrossdiverseinteger- POST-PLACE-AND-ROUTERESULTSFORCMACANDPCUUNITSWITHA
basedprecisionsandgranularitiesofcomputedatapath,paving 16X4ARRAYFOR45NMCMOS.THETOTALAREAISINMM2,ANDTHE
the path for more silicon-optimized and scalable DLAs.
TOTALPOWERISINMW.
NanGate45 NanGate45
Design
Total Area Total Power
B. Place-and-Route Results CMAC Core 0.0361 10.7013
Tempus Core 0.0168 6.1146
Place-and-route analysis for INT4-based CMAC and PCU
units with 16 × 4 array is conducted using 45nm CMOS,
C. Energy Evaluation with Workload-Dependent Latency
maintaining 70% floorplan utilization for a fair comparison.
As shown in Table III, PCU reduces total area by 53% and TempusCore’s2s-unaryencoding[10]allowsittoleverage
power by 44% compared to binary multipliers. This confirms dynamic value sparsity, improving energy efficiency by re-
thepotentialoftemporal-unarydesignsforlow-precisionedge- ducing compute latency. Higher sparsity in the unary encoded
basedDLAs.Theareautilizationforbothdesignsisillustrated signal results in lower latency. We profiled two DNN work-
in Fig. 6, which depicts the decrease in area utilization of the loads,MobileNetV2andResNeXt101,usingmax-poolingover
PCU design compared to the CMAC unit. 16 × 16 tiles of convolution layer weights. Fig. 7 shows

---PAGE BREAK---

binary PE array, k partial sums are produced per cycle,
whereas the tub-based array in Tempus Core requires m
k×n
cycles, where m represents half of the largest weight
k×n
magnitude in the array (2s-unary encoding). INT8 analysis
shows 16 binary PE cells consume 0.09 µm² (from Fig. 4),
whereas 80 tub PE cells fit in the same area (0.018 µm² for
16PEcells),yieldinga5xthroughputimprovement.Similarly,
INT4 shows 4x iso-area throughput boost for the same array
size. For a single PE cell, scaling across different n number
Fig. 7. Weight magnitude profiling across the convolution layer weights of of multipliers (reported in Table II), the iso-area throughput
MobileNetV2(left)andResNeXt101(right)withmaxpoolof16×16. improvements are illustrated in Fig. 9 for both INT8 and
INT4 precisions (assuming the same m cycles to generate
one partial product). From the area scaling estimates, we
can further project iso-area throughput improvements for a
quadratic increase from n = 256 to n = 65536 multipliers.
The throughput increases by as much as 26x and 18x for
INT8andINT4precisions,respectively.Hence,basedonthese
observations, we expect iso-area throughput gains to scale
even further with increasing array sizes, compensating for the
increased compute cycles thus further improving the practical
feasibility of Tempus Core.
Fig. 8. Sparsity profiling across the convolution layer weights of Mo-
bileNetV2(left)andResNeXt101(right)withtilesizeof16×16.
the frequency of weight values (0-128) which correlate with
compute latency in a 16 × 16 array. The area under the
curve normalized by the total sum of frequencies provides the
average workload-dependent latency. Using this methodology,
MobileNetV2 incurs 33 cycles, and ResNeXt101 incurs 31
cycles, on average, using 2s-unary encoding. Note that these
latencies are almost halved compared to the worst-case INT8
latency of 64 cycles. Using these workload-dependent cycle
counts and the 4ns clock period (250 MHz) along with
INT8 power consumption values for 16 × 16 array (Fig.
4), application-specific energy is derived. For the binary-
Fig.9. Iso-areathroughputimprovementsforasinglePEcell(k=1)across
based array, the energy consumption is 15pJ. For tub-based varying number of multipliers for INT8 (left) and INT4 (right) precisions,
array, it amounts to 187pJ and 176pJ for MobilNetV2 and assumingsamemcyclesoflatencyincurred.Reddottedtrendlinesproject
iso-areathroughputimprovementsbasedonareascalingfromTableII.
ResNeXt101, respectively, due to the higher compute cycle
counts.Althoughthehighercyclecountresultsinlowerenergy
VI. CONCLUSIONSANDFUTUREWORK
efficiency for Tempus Core for INT8, there is potential to
reducethisgapbyleveragingzero-valueweightstodisablethe In this paper, we introduced Tempus Core, a temporal-
corresponding PE compute. From zero-value weight profiling unary-binary hybrid convolution engine optimized for seam-
per16×16tilesizeinFig.8,theaveragenumberofsilentPEs less integration into modern edge DLAs. By extending unary
forMobileNetV2is6(250activePEs)and2forResNeXt101. computing beyond GEMM-level optimizations to support full
The above energy calculation assumes that all 256 PEs in the convolutionoperations,TempusCoredemonstratessubstantial
tile is active for 31 and 33 cycles, which is an overestimate. improvement in area and power efficiency. By demonstrat-
The energy overhead is reduced for lower precision. With ing 5x and 4x iso-area throughput improvements for INT8
INT4,theworstcaselatencyis4cyclesfortubmultiplierswith and INT4 precisions, respectively, for a 16 × 16 PE array,
twos-unary encoding. This results in 7.48pJ for the binary PE we have established a pathway to significantly enhance the
array, and 17.76pJ for tub-based PE array, indicating energy- performance-per-unitcostratioofedgeAIaccelerators.Inthe
gap decrease from 11.7x (INT8) to 2.3x (INT4). future,wewouldliketoextendtheworktowardsunary-based
compute architectures targeted towards ultra-low precision
D. Iso-Area Throughput Improvements
quantized large language models (LLMs). Additionally, we
While the Tempus Core design incurs multiple cycles for aim to explore custom dataflows and compiler optimizations
convolutionduetotheincorporationofthetubPEs,throughput thatfurtherreducelatencyandenergyconsumption,enhancing
improvementscantranscendthelatencyincrease.InNVDLA’s the practicality of unary computing in AI hardware.

---PAGE BREAK---

REFERENCES [13] P.Vellaisamy,H.Nair,D.Wu,S.Blanton,andJ.P.Shen,
“Exploration of unary arithmetic-based matrix multiply
[1] A.Krizhevsky,I.Sutskever,andG.E.Hinton,“Imagenet units for low precision dl accelerators.”
classification with deep convolutional neural networks,” [14] S. Li, A. O. Glova, X. Hu, P. Gu, D. Niu, K. T. Malladi,
Advances in neural information processing systems, H. Zheng, B. Brennan, and Y. Xie, “Scope: A stochastic
vol. 25, 2012. computing engine for dram-based in-situ accelerator,” in
[2] C.-J. Wu, R. Raghavendra, U. Gupta, B. Acun, 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
N. Ardalani, K. Maeng, G. Chang, F. Aga, J. Huang, on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 2018, pp. 696–
C. Bai et al., “Sustainable ai: Environmental impli- 709.
cations, challenges and opportunities,” Proceedings of [15] I. G. Thakkar, S. M. Shivanandamurthy, and S. A.
Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 4, pp. 795–813, Salehi,“Low-latency,energy-efficientin-dramcnnaccel-
2022. eration with bit-parallel unary computing,” in Embedded
[3] X.Sun,N.Wang,C.-Y.Chen,J.Ni,A.Agrawal,X.Cui, Machine Learning for Cyber-Physical, IoT, and Edge
S.Venkataramani,K.ElMaghraoui,V.V.Srinivasan,and Computing: Hardware Architectures. Springer, 2023,
K.Gopalakrishnan,“Ultra-lowprecision4-bittrainingof pp. 393–409.
deep neural networks,” Advances in Neural Information [16] L.S.Blackford,A.Petitet,R.Pozo,K.Remington,R.C.
Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 1796–1807, 2020. Whaley,J.Demmel,J.Dongarra,I.Duff,S.Hammarling,
[4] P. Micikevicius, D. Stosic, N. Burgess, M. Cornea, G. Henry et al., “An updated set of basic linear algebra
P.Dubey,R.Grisenthwaite,S.Ha,A.Heinecke,P.Judd, subprograms(blas),”ACMTransactionsonMathematical
J. Kamalu et al., “Fp8 formats for deep learning,” arXiv Software, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 135–151, 2002.
preprint arXiv:2209.05433, 2022. [17] Y. Jia, Learning semantic image representations at a
[5] J.Choquette,“Nvidiahoppergpu:Scalingperformance,” large scale. University of California, Berkeley, 2014.
in 2022 IEEE Hot Chips 34 Symposium (HCS). IEEE [18] H. Genc, S. Kim, A. Amid, A. Haj-Ali, V. Iyer,
Computer Society, 2022, pp. 1–46. P. Prakash, J. Zhao, D. Grubb, H. Liew, H. Mao
[6] F.Zhu,R.Gong,F.Yu,X.Liu,Y.Wang,Z.Li,X.Yang, et al., “Gemmini: Enabling systematic deep-learning
and J. Yan, “Towards unified int8 training for convolu- architectureevaluationviafull-stackintegration,”in2021
tional neural network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC).
ConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition, IEEE, 2021, pp. 769–774.
2020, pp. 1969–1979. [19] A. Gonzalez and C. Hong, “A chipyard comparison of
[7] T. Han, T. Zhang, D. Li, G. Liu, L. Tian, D. Xie, nvdla and gemmini,” Berkeley, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. EE,
and Y. S. Shan, “Convolutional neural network with pp. 290–2, 2020.
int4 optimization on xilinx devices,” Xilinx White Paper,
WP521, 2020.
[8] S. Jain, A. Gural, M. Wu, and C. Dick, “Trained
quantization thresholds for accurate and efficient fixed-
point inference of deep neural networks,” Proceedings
of Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 2, pp. 112–128,
2020.
[9] H. Nair, P. Vellaisamy, A. Chen, J. Finn, A. Li,
M. Trivedi, and J. P. Shen, “tugemm: Area-power-
efficient temporal unary gemm architecture for low-
precision edge ai,” in 2023 IEEE International Sympo-
siumonCircuitsandSystems(ISCAS). IEEE,2023,pp.
1–5.
[10] P. Vellaisamy, H. Nair, J. Finn, M. Trivedi, A. Chen,
A. Li, T.-H. Lin, P. Wang, S. Blanton, and J. P.
Shen, “tubgemm: Energy-efficient and sparsity-effective
temporal-unary-binary based matrix multiply unit,” in
2023 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on
VLSI (ISVLSI), 2023, pp. 1–6.
[11] P.Vellaisamy,H.Nair,D.Wu,S.Blanton,andJ.P.Shen,
“Exploration of unary arithmetic-based matrix multiply
units for low precision dl accelerators,” in 2024 IEEE
Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI).
IEEE, 2024.
[12] “Nvdla primer,” http://nvdla.org/primer.html.

---PAGE BREAK---

